[doc] Release notes new features for 2024.2 (#25005)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/releases/ybdb-releases/v2024.2.md

---
title: What's new in the YugabyteDB v2024.2 LTS release series
headerTitle: What's new in the YugabyteDB v2024.2 LTS release series
linkTitle: v2024.2 series (LTS)
description: Enhancements, changes, and resolved issues in the YugabyteDB v2024.1 STS release series recommended for production deployments.
menu:
 preview_releases:
   identifier: v2024.2
   parent: ybdb-releases
   weight: 2780
rightNav:
 hideH4: true
type: docs
---

What follows are the release notes for the YugabyteDB 2024.2 release series. Content will be added as new notable features and changes are available in the patch releases of the YugabyteDB 2024.2 release series.

For an RSS feed of all release series, point your feed reader to the [RSS feed for releases](../index.xml).

> ## v2024.2.0.0 - November 27, 2024 {#v2024.2.0.0}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## v2024.2.0.0 - December 1, 2024 {#v2024.2.0.0}
```

      <span>Linux x86</span>
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="https://downloads.yugabyte.com/releases/2024.2.0.0/yugabyte-2024.2.0.0-b136-el8-aarch64.tar.gz">
      <i class="fa-brands fa-linux"></i>
      <span>Linux ARM</span>
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

**Docker:**

```sh
docker pull yugabytedb/yugabyte:2024.2.0.0-b136
```

### Highlights

We're excited to announce the [Early Access](/preview/releases/versioning/#early-access-ea) and [General Availability](/preview/releases/versioning/#general-availability-ga) of the following powerful new features in YugabyteDB aimed at simplifying operations, enhancing functionality, and improving performance.

**Yugabyte Kubernetes Operator** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}

The [Yugabyte Kubernetes Operator](/preview/quick-start/kubernetes/#yugabytedb-kubernetes-operator) is a powerful tool designed to automate deploying, scaling, and managing YugabyteDB clusters in Kubernetes environments. It streamlines database operations, reducing manual effort for developers and operators. For more information, refer to the [YugabyteDB Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-k8s-operator) GitHub project.

> **Active Session History** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Active session history** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}
```

Get real-time and historical views of system activity by sampling session activity in the database. This feature can be used to troubleshoot performance issues effectively. For more information, refer to [Active Session History](/stable/explore/observability/active-session-history/) (ASH) documentation.

> **Instant Database Cloning** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Instant database cloning** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}
```

> [Instant Database Cloning](/stable/manage/backup-restore/instant-db-cloning/) allows you to quickly create independent copies of your database for data recovery, development, and testing. Clones can be created in seconds, and initially consume no additional disk space because they share the same data files as the original database at creation but operate independently after that. Clones can be created as of now or at any time in the recent past (within a configurable history retention period), enabling developers to experiment without impacting production performance. This feature also provides a safety net for rapid recovery from accidental SQL or CQL human errors that cause data loss or corruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Instant database cloning](/stable/manage/backup-restore/instant-db-cloning/) allows you to quickly create independent copies of your database for data recovery, development, and testing. Clones can be created in seconds, and initially consume no additional disk space because they share the same data files as the original database at creation but operate independently after that. Clones can be created as of now or at any time in the recent past (within a configurable history retention period), enabling developers to experiment without impacting production performance. This feature also provides a safety net for rapid recovery from accidental SQL or CQL human errors that cause data loss or corruption.
```

**pg_cron extension** {{<tags/feature/ga>}}

> [pg_cron extension](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgcron/) brings a cron-based job scheduler into the database. With pg_cron, you can schedule YSQL commands using familiar cron syntax, including jobs on intervals as fine as seconds. While pg_cron operates on a single node known as the pg_cron leader, the queries it schedules leverage the full resources of the distributed cluster. On node failure, leadership is automatically transferred, ensuring continuous availability and smooth scheduling operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [pg_cron extension](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgcron/) brings a cron-based job scheduler into the database. With pg_cron, you can schedule YSQL commands using familiar cron syntax, including jobs on intervals as fine as seconds. While pg_cron operates on a single node known as the pg_cron leader, the queries it schedules leverage the full resources of the distributed cluster. On node failure, leadership is automatically transferred, ensuring continuous availability and smooth scheduling operations.
```

**pg_partman extension** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}

> [pg_partman extension](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgpartman/) can be used to create and manage both time-based and serial-based (aka range-based) table partition sets. pg_partman simplifies managing table partitions based on time or serial IDs, automating their creation and maintenance. Pg_partman is often used in combination with [pg_cron](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgcron/) for data lifecycle management, and specifically for managing data aging, retention, and expiration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [pg_partman extension](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgpartman/) to create and manage both time- and serial-based (aka range-based) table partition sets. pg_partman simplifies managing table partitions based on time or serial IDs, automating their creation and maintenance. pg_partman is often used in combination with [pg_cron](/stable/explore/ysql-language-features/pg-extensions/extension-pgcron/) for data lifecycle management, and specifically for managing data aging, retention, and expiration.
```

**Colocated tables with tablespaces** {{<tags/feature/ea>}}

> Starting this release, you can create [Colocated tables with tablespaces](/stable/explore/colocation/#colocated-tables-with-tablespaces). With this enhancement, you can now take advantage of colocated tables for geo-distributed use cases, eliminating the need for trade-offs between distributing data across specific regions. You enable the feature using the `ysql_enable_colocated_tables_with_tablespaces` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting this release, you can create [colocated tables with tablespaces](/stable/explore/colocation/#colocated-tables-with-tablespaces). With this enhancement, you can now take advantage of colocated tables for geo-distributed use cases, eliminating the need for trade-offs between distributing data across specific regions. You enable the feature using the `ysql_enable_colocated_tables_with_tablespaces` flag.
```

<!-- IDEA-1093 is moved to 2024.2.1
* [Skip column updates](/stable/reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#yb-skip-redundant-update-ops). Avoids updating columns which are included in any index and foreign key constraints when the columns values are not changed. -->

* SELECT query performance. Enables the batching for locking the rows and thus helps improve the performance of the queries which lock more than 1 row using SELECT FOR UPDATE.
<!-- No docs needed-->

* Sequential scan speed. Improved ANALYZE and sequential scan performance by leveraging OS-level read-ahead, resulting in up to 8x faster ANALYZE operations.
<!-- IDEA-1878. Unsure about docs -->

* ALTER support. Added support for miscellaneous ALTER TABLE DDLs.
<!-- DOC-528 pending -->

* Catalog caching. Added ability to find catalog tables that can be pre-loaded to improve latency for the first query in a connection, or after a DDL change in the cluster. {{<tags/feature/ea>}}
<!-- DOC-526, won't make it to 2024.2 -->

* CDC connector on Confluent Hub. YugabyteDB CDC Connector is now available in Confluent Hub. {{<tags/feature/ea>}}
<!-- No docs needed-->

> * [Connection pooling](/stable/explore/going-beyond-sql/connection-mgr-ysql/). Added support for built-in connection pooling. {{<tags/feature/tp>}}

Reviewer: this was TP in 2.19

Author: https://yugabyte.atlassian.net/jira/polaris/projects/IDEA/ideas/view/4493977?selectedIssue=IDEA-437&issueViewSection=comments - native connection pooling looks like a different idea which is TP now
